paper's running.
We're talking to David McCauley.
Thank you for just describing all these things, if you would.
Let's start with that.
Yeah, this is my fake childhood, you see here.
It's like the childhood I never had.
We left England.
I did have it, actually.
We left England when I was almost 11, so I left a lot of stuff behind, books and some of my favorite things, just because we couldn't bring that much stuff with us.
So, I don't know, maybe that was part of the motive, the motivation for, over the years, acquiring odds and ends
There's no rhyme or reason to it.
I've always liked trains, steam engines.
Grew up in England watching them.
Whenever I could, I would go and watch the trains.
So that's what theirs are for.
The soldiers, obviously, I had some soldiers in England, but these are all newer.
It's just stuff.
I mean, it's just the kind of stuff that I like to be surrounded by in the place where I work.
I count 16 shelves going up, one, two, three, four, five compartments going left to right.
And I guess what I'm looking at are toy soldiers, we're looking at animals, we're looking at... You've got... ...vehicle... Yeah, you name it.
It's in here.
Bits of ceramic, cardboard models, some rewards, some... I mean, just stuff.
It's... It's a mammoth that actually... Would you describe yourself as a collector?
No.
No, pack rat.
Pack rat.
Collector is too dignified a term.
An accumulator, a pack rat, yeah, the sort of lint trap of humanity.
I mean, this kind of stuff, just, I'm attracted to it.
So are the icons of the youth, perhaps?
They are.
I think they are, in some ways.
I think having to leave stuff behind that I liked made me, you know, left a desire to sort of reacquire it at some point, I mean, subconsciously.
I don't think it's, you know, too heavy.
But I've always liked and admired little things.
I mean, I like to look at things.
I like to take the time to look at little things.
So I tend to, you know, sort of hold onto them, to revisit them.
And I had boxes of these things in the old studio, or a 12-inch wide standard shelf like these.
filled with stuff, and you couldn't see any of it.
So when I moved to this studio, I actually had these shelves made so that you would never have more than two or three things deep, and you could actually see them.
So you could see everything.
Yeah, so you could see everything.
And I do, surprisingly, every once in a while, just turn around and look at the shelves or take something off the shelves with no rhyme or reason.
It just attracts my attention.
Is there, in your view, a unity to it?
I'm wondering, you know, I see some connection here, I think, between some of your work.
Well, some of the pieces directly relate to my work.
I mean, there are black and white things and there are mammoth things and obviously things that, mostly those things I've been given.
There are the, you know, the rubber masks from Spitting Image, just because I admire that kind of sapphire much of the time.
The soldiers are nice because you can line them up.
And no matter how chaotic your life gets, you always appear to be in control, which is a very nice feeling.
So if you can turn around and see 35 soldiers all lined up in a row, somehow, as chaotic as life gets, it can't be that bad, because they're still in a row.
And there's this sort of false sense of security, undoubtedly, that comes from that.
Do you prowl flea markets?
No, no.
No, I'm not even a flea market person.
These are things that I have just gone out and bought in stores as much as they are things that I've just acquired.
People say, well, why don't you have this?
You seem to like this kind of stuff.
The Mammoth, the Harry Mammoth on the second shelf over there is the newest edition.
And that was actually brought by a fellow from California who came to visit and found it probably in some kind of junk store.
I said, you know, I know the guy who should have this.
And he brought it with him.
My father made the windmill.
So, and it works.
I mean, it actually, when you turn the blades of the windmill, the grinding wheel is inside turn.
It's all geared and so on.
He, like me, is fascinated with how things work and also loves the act of building models.
The ship model I built when I was doing ship because I knew nothing about ships and I certainly knew nothing about rigging.
So I decided that I would get a model that would be big enough where I would have to install the rigging and therefore I could learn what on earth all these ropes did.
That was in preparation.
That was in preparation for the book.
Prior to that, when I drew a ship, I just drew lots of ropes all over the place.
It looks like it's written.
As with all of these books, or many of them, it's really teach yourself the subject.
Is that the ship that you used in the book?
No, that's the same.
The caravels were smaller.
And then, of course, you get a skeleton.
Is that an authentic skeleton?
Oh, that's a real skeleton.
Yeah, a whole bunch of skeletons downstairs.
I bought that years ago in anticipation of doing the book on the body, building the body.
It's a building.
I may do it.
I just haven't gotten around to it.
Some of the ideas are, you know, 10, 20 years old by the time they get to.
This book, which I had a galley for...are there finished copies for this yet, by the way?
I don't want to run this story before the book can be purchased.
It's supposed to be shipped, I think, on the 15th of September.
By the time this runs, it'll be just about that time.
But which book is this for you, in terms of numbers, chronology?
How many have they now published?
Good question.
I don't know how to count it.
Okay, but approximately?
I think it's the 17th or 16th or 17th something.
Over how, and when was the first book?
Well, it started, Cathedral is the first book, and it's 25 years old next year.
Wow.
So will your publisher be doing a 25th anniversary edition?
We're talking about doing something, a 25th anniversary edition of Cathedral, but I'm actually more interested in doing, I mean, what do you do with a 25th anniversary edition?
Write a forward edition?
Write a forward, right, and reissue it or something like that.
I would much rather do a book on how the book was done that accompanies it.
But I don't want to do it just on cathedral, because I didn't know very much when I was doing cathedral.
I mean, I sort of stumbled through that process and did the best I could.
But if I'm going to go to the trouble of making a book about how the building books were created, I'm going to have to include all the building books, you know, City, Pyramid, Cowan.
And I think that's what I'm going to do.
I'm just working on it this morning a little bit.
A how-to.
So how old were you then?
I guess it's an indirect way to imagine how old you are now.
I was 26.
I'm 50 now.
So I've been at it since.
So you've been at it for half of your life.
72, yeah.
Good half.
And you said you came here from England.
You don't betray any accent.
So where did you move to?
New Jersey.
And how long have you been to move from New England?
Well, we only spent five years in New Jersey.
And we moved to Rhode Island.
Your family?
The family, yep.
My brother, sister, parents.
And they're all here?
They're all here.
Well, my sister and brother are, my sister's in New York now, and my brother's in New Orleans.
And you said your father made that, so he clearly has some very excellent manual skills.
Oh, yeah.
Is he an artist like this?
No, he's worked in textiles all his life, and he retired about
I don't know, eight years ago, something like that.
He worked with textile machines, the big machines that produced enormous bolts of fabric.
But he was the guy who kept the machines going and modified them and adjusted them and so on.
So, always good with his hands.
Worked on aircraft during the war for the RAF, which is where he met my mother.
I think the important thing about my parents, there are many, but one of the important things about my parents is that their influence on me has been very clear.
They're both makers.
They never, never, they're not capable of sitting idle.
It drives them both crazy.
They're both makers of things.
My mother sews needlepoint and all that sort of stuff.
I mean, she used to make up clothes and one thing and another knitting and all that stuff.
My father always made, you know, furniture and stuff like that that we happened to need
And so I was always aware, growing up in England, of process.
You know, that things didn't just fall out of the air.
I mean, you know, there was a way things got done.
And if you were going to do things, you did them certain ways.
The old cliche, if it's worth doing, it's worth doing.
But I saw firsthand.
And I was always encouraged to draw and to make things and to sort of let my imagination run.
And because you have such a fertile imagination, I'm wondering,
what you wanted to be when you were a kid.
Oh, fireman?
Fireman for a long time.
And I wanted to be a lifeguard, not the kind at the beach, but the kind in London with the tall hats that sit on the horses in front of, is it Kensington or St.
James's Palace?
I think it's St.
James's.
But they're one group of the soldiers.
And I don't have a single lifeguard here.
Oh, no, I didn't.
Those are the hats of the lifeblocks.
But only one, I guess.
That's pretty heavy.
Are these metal?
Yeah, these are the old metal ones.
From the Coronation.
This is the 1938 Coronation Concession.
Are they hand-painted?
No.
So, you wanted to be a fireman?
You wanted to be a lifeguard?
A lifeguard, yeah.
And my grandfather was a kind of
Not a full-fledged architect, but somewhere between architect and severe.
And so he had a lot of portfolios of architectural drawings and all the tools in this room that we were never allowed to go in.
And so I was always intrigued by that, too.
So I think those kinds of influences stayed with me and shaped what I do.
One of the sort of ironic, almost coincidental things is that growing up in England, in a very small house in the north of England,
Whenever I could, I got out of it, because it was small.
I mean, it was just like two rooms on the first floor and two and a half bedrooms on the second floor.
That was it.
I'm in a row house.
So I spent a lot of time outside, and there were woods nearby and all that sort of stuff.
So that's where my imagination was.
I was always out there playing.
And with the advent of television, I think we only had television for about maybe two years before we came.
Maybe two, maybe one.
I don't know.
We came in 57, and I can't remember exactly when we got our television.
I know we never had the refrigerator, but we did get the TV, and that's when I saw the Long Ranger and stuff like that.
So I was always out there, you know, on horseback.
At what point did you discover you had this talent to visualize things and see anything?
Well, the easy answer is...
I don't know that I... I guess I discovered I had something.
Back in what would have been, I guess, third or fourth grade, I made a painting of a fire engine in a school in England, and the teachers made a fuss of it for the first time.
And they put it on the wall, and I thought, well, I like the way this feels.
And I think that was a... From that point on, drawing took on a power.
I mean, I saw that this making pictures had a kind of power to it.
I never stopped doing it for that reason.
All through high school, I drew the Beatles.
I would always come in just about every morning into the cafeteria where we all sat, waiting for classes to start, and show my latest drawings, which I would have done after homework the night before.
I milked it for all it was worth, and then eventually realized that it could actually be a profession.
I wanted to illustrate
I think I wanted to illustrate because I really wanted to see my name on the cover of a book.
I thought that would be really great and exciting.
I don't know that I had anything to say particularly.
This is roughly around when you were a teenager or in high school?
No, this is now when I'm sort of working my way through architecture school at RISD.
Okay, you should give me the educational background.
Okay.
Well, it's very simple.
It's after high school.
Which was here.
Which was here and finishing up in Rhode Island, graduated in 64, and then to
School of Design.
Graduating in 1969 with a degree in architecture.
Expecting to be an architect?
No, I think I did when I started, or I thought I might be when I started.
I certainly knew by my fourth year that I did not want to be an architect.
It just seemed too cumbersome a process and too filled with compromise.
Too many people get their fingers in it because there's too much money involved.
So I wanted to do something else, and so I thought maybe freelance illustration
Not that I'd ever considered illustration as a serious career.
While a student, I didn't go into the illustration department.
And I've never regretted that.
I went into a department with a very rigorous, structured program that really taught me how to think and how to solve design problems in a very logical way, which I ultimately discovered I could apply to any number of situations.
It didn't have to be buildings.
Were you able to explore any freelance work?
Yeah, I did.
My first job was a menu cover for a local Chinese restaurant in Providence.
There's one of them downstairs.
And I have an ad from the newspaper that I did for the same restaurant.
I did a lot of free stuff, because it would get printed.
You know, a poster for Brown University, a choral trip to England, and stuff like that.
Whatever would be printed, I would do for nothing.
That's how it started, and I began to develop some story ideas, and I encouraged a couple of friends of mine to develop story ideas who I thought were much more competent than I to write stories, and they actually were.
And I would design the books, you know, sort of create these little books and make all the drawings and stuff like that, and eventually put together enough stuff to take up to Boston, to Mifflin, and show around.
And I got no really...
Nobody wanted to publish any of it, but I sort of got encouragement.
And that was the thing.
This is in 71, roughly 71.
I was doing 70, 71.
And in 72, I had this idea of my own for a gargoyle beauty pageant set in the Middle Ages.
Middle-aged, you know, France.
Cathedral half under construction in the background and half built in the background.
And then Walter Lorraine, who has been my editor ever since.
L-O-R-A-I-N-E, said, basically, why don't you get rid of these gargoyles?
I had gargoyles flying around, and this kind of magical.
Just tell us about the cathedral.
It looks like that's what you want to do in these drawings.
And, well, he put his finger on it instantly.
So I thought, I was disappointed at first, because I thought, these gargoyles are great.
It's a real classic.
But it was like a bad version of where the wild things are, in retrospect.
So I started reading more stuff about Gothic construction, and began to visualize the drawings that I could make, and realized that I could tell a building story, primarily visually.
And so I put together some sketches, just about the sequence of construction, from digging a hole in the ground to the finished building, all drawn in pencil.
And I had no idea how big a book could be to be practical, in terms of actually printing it, or never mind selling it at a reasonable price.
So these were all big things.
But I took them up and I laid them out on the table for Walter and went through the story.
And he said, okay, let's do it.
That was in December of 1972.
In January of 1973, I was in France.
I went for a week and a half to Amiens, a cathedral I chose out of the book because it looked like the most cohesive and coherent cathedral.
which is, I think, actually much more beautiful, grew over a much longer period of time, which is why the spires are so different, and the asymmetrical facade and whatnot.
So the cathedral, pardon me, but in the book, is it more of like a generic cathedral?
It's more of a generic cathedral.
It was built in a relatively short period of time, I think about 30 years, which is really fast for those buildings.
Most of the time, they ran out of money, and they had to stop for 20 years or something like that and parade the relics around the country and raise more funds, and then they could
to build.
So I wanted to sort of, if the people of the time could choose how they would like to build their building, I would assume that they would have liked to have gotten it done in their lifetime, you know, or at least a couple of generations, just to see it.
So that's the way I decided to go.
Did you have a reader in mind?
Was it a kid's book in your view?
No, it was a picture book.
I mean, and then... I think the audience still is
remains to be defined for you, doesn't it?
Absolutely, and so I don't bother with it.
I figure the books will find their audience.
And if you don't speak down, you not only will attract an adult audience, you won't offend a younger audience.
So I don't speak down.
I mean, I just tell it straight.
And every time I try and guess the sort of youngest age of the readers of my books, I'm always surprised, because there's always one younger than I would have guessed.
So I don't try and guess anymore.
I just tell... I mean, some of the books are... Some of the picture books, the real full-color picture books, the kind of zany stuff like Shortcut and Why the Chicken Crossed the Road, are more clearly for a younger audience.
But the other stuff really is, I hope, an all-age kind of experience.
And you get it at whatever level you are ready.
My wife and I were agreeing on the ride down here, and I don't know how things work.
That's a reference book that you see adults like myself using, because you've clearly paid a lot of attention to accuracy there, and to getting it right, and to making it a... Accuracy is important to me.
It always has been.
It's like, I mean, I think that's something else that comes from my parents.
You know, if you're going to do it, do it right.
And there's no reason not to be accurate.
It doesn't take that much longer to do the research.
And undoubtedly you're training as an architect.
Makes me.
The attention to detail.
I can't just put a bush in front of it because I don't know what it looks like.
I have to know what it looks like.
Even if I have to end up putting a bush in front of it because I want that visually, but I've got to know what that part of the building or what that piece of equipment or what it looks like.
I hate drawing stuff that I'm not prepared to draw.
It's very hard.
So can you characterize
your body of work as a hoover, as a corpus of work that does more or less do a lot of similar things?
Certainly the building books all do.
I mean, the architecture books, including Underground and Mill and even Parts of the Amazing Brain, really are about understanding why things look the way they do, how they got to be that way.
The way things work, you know,
Why they look that way, how they get to be that way, and what they do.
It's all investigation.
It all stems from, I think, my own curiosity about how things work, why things work the way they do.
And I've learned that that's what it is I like to do.
I didn't know that.
I couldn't have described that to you back in 1971.
I wouldn't have had a clue.
Even though I think it was definitely in place, because my architectural training was already there and at work.
It's been a long time.
process of sort of learning what it is that makes me happy, what gives me pleasure, and I've discovered that what gives me pleasure actually gives a lot of people pleasure.
So I'm able to use my talents to, in a sense, share my enthusiasm for discovery.
The response to Cathedral, I think, was quite... It's an amazing start.
Tell me briefly.
Well, I just, I remember people made a fuss.
I mean, again, it's a long time ago now, and people made a fuss, which felt great.
It was like the fire engine on the wall.
You arrived full blown, basically.
Well, that's what it appeared to be.
I mean, that's certainly the way it looked at people.
Here was this 9x12 black and white book that everybody was talking about.
My clearest memory of the reaction to that book was being in a taxi with Walter in New York,
I guess we're in an ALA, and we're going from one place to another, and I'd been signing books for two and a half hours on the floor or something like that, and he said, well, what are you going to do next?
I'm like, oh, jeez, what am I going to do next?
I'm enjoying this.
What am I going to do next?
Do you mean I have to do another?
And I did City because the other, I thought to myself, okay, now why did I choose Cathedral?
Because
In studying the history of architecture at RISD, those buildings had really impressed me, and I just loved that whole thing.
And I thought, what was another thing from those history of architecture classes that I really liked?
And it was Roman planning, Roman planning and engineering.
And I sort of admired what the Romans, at least in theory, were trying to do when they had laid out a city.
And I thought, well, I could go back to that and do some more reading on that.
And next thing I know, I'm back in...
In fact, it was after the ALA, that summer, I'm back in France.
Again, southern France, in Nîmes and Arles, looking at Roman ruins.
And then I was also in Pompeii and Herculaneus.
Let's kind of bring ourselves now to how things work and this new book.
You indicated yesterday briefly on the phone that this is a work of passion.
Yeah.
Let's go from that book to this one.
I'm more passionate about the subject matter.
I'm passionate, obviously, about knowing how things work and being able to be clear about it.
And that's true, definitely, with the way things work.
But it's not a book that... I'm not emotional about the way things work, except how long it took to do it.
I thought we would never finish it.
I'm emotional about the subject matter, but I'm also concerned about the details in the subject matter of Romantics.
And part of that is that Rome... I went to Italy as a fifth-year student in architecture.
I spent a year there.
It was my first year away from home since we left England at the age of 11.
I was on my own for the first time in Italy, in Rome, with 24 other students from the School of Design.
And for a school year, I knew that city to myself.
So, of course, I feel passionate about it.
I mean, that was the beginning of life in many ways.
And I go back there, and it's interesting.
I don't speak Italian very well at all.
I never have.
I can get by.
I can't have a deep conversation with anybody to save my life.
And yet, I always feel at home there.
And I thought, what is it about this place that makes you feel at home when you can't actually talk to anybody?
I mean, you're isolated.
And as an isolated individual who can then somehow still feel comfortable and still feel at home, something about this physical place must be contributing to that sensation.
And what it is, I think, is that it is truly an eternal city.
There is no real line between the past and the present.
They mix.
It's an amazing city for recycling itself.
And it's continued to recycle itself for over 2,000 years.
So you get these...
Phenomenal juxtapositions of past and present.
You know, the scooter leaning up against a first century Doric column.
And it seems perfectly appropriate.
It's absolutely appropriate.
It's all life.
And the way people in the sort of, let's say the Renaissance, or shortly after the Renaissance, used pieces of Roman architecture to decorate, to embellish their homes that they were building.
So you get Roman carvings and bits of sculpture stuck in the walls of a 16th century building.
There's a sense of continuity.
That is probably the single most powerful force for me in Rome, and the single most reassuring, because as life gets crazier, to go to a place where you have that sense of continuity, a sense of survival, a sense of people being able to make it through horrible times,
And somehow they get by, they go on.
I find really great.
It sort of fills you with some hope.
And that's one of the things Rome does.
Visually, every time you turn a corner in Rome, you don't know what to expect.
That's another thing I find extremely exciting about the city.
You just don't know what's around the corner.
And it could be a bit of a Roman temple front, again, stuck in another wall.
It could be that the street is dug up and all the cobbles are piled up in these kind of pyramid shapes against the wall while the guys are trying to fix water pipes
And you see the structure of the road, and you know that the road surface is 10 feet higher than the road surface was in running times.
And in doing this, did you do much of it from your memory of it, or did you find that you had to go back?
Oh, no, I went back.
I spent two summers there.
Not last summer, but the two summers before I spent there.
And I went back again in the spring of this year to make one more four-day kind of foray
Once I determined the route, I was going to have the pigeon fly.
I went back and traveled the route and looked very carefully to make sure I had the right angles and so on and so forth.
My imagination determines the overall approach to the subject matter, and it also determines what the angles are from which I show these things.
From that point on, I try to make sure I have the information necessary to draw this stuff as accurately as possible so you really can feel that you're up there.
Well, I feel that's another thing.
I mean,
that many of us can fly and look at the policy from up here.
So you really do have to figure things out.
Yeah, and it's a combination.
I tell the students at RISD when I'm teaching not to become too dependent on photographs, because if you become dependent on photographs, you're forced to put the viewer in always new real places, on solid ground.
And that's not necessarily where you always want to be, to tell the most exciting story.
You've got to be able to develop
your ability with perspective.
If you get a handle on perspective, you can really be anywhere.
And you've got to develop your imagination to know where to be.
You don't want it to be a documentary.
No, not at all.
There has to be that element of whimsy and imagination.
That's right, that's right.
Which is highlighted by the trail and the pigeon.
I want to get the blue red line.
Yeah, exactly.
That gives me a chance to embellish things, to draw your attention to architectural details in a very playful way, to do a little slapstick,
to soften it up so you're not buying a portfolio of pseudo-Piranesi drawings of Rome.
It's another kind of experience, and hopefully sort of catch onto that fairly quickly.
Do you get many people saying, gee, David, why don't you do these in color?
Well, this book went back and forth.
There's a sketch on the wall there that you can see looking up at the sky, just to the end to the left.
There's a black and white version of that filling in the book.
And I went back and forth.
I was torn about that because
It is a city where the colors are really important to me.
The way the colors on the buildings change, especially in the evening as the sun is setting, you don't forget it.
Part of that may have to do with the wine, but you really don't forget the way these buildings, they glow at night.
It's amazing.
But I decided, no, this is going to be a black and white book.
This is intentionally going to remind people, in a sense, of the architecture books of 25 years ago, but it's also
Because of its playfulness, it's more like shortcut and more whimsical like the later books.
So it is a kind of bringing together both ends of this 25-year period around a subject that I'm sure was really influential and critical in kind of getting me started in this sort of desire to use my imagination in some creative way.
Now, you see, I'll be pointing out my piece.
You might, a person will pick this book up in a bookstore and they'll see very little text is at a decided minimum.
But then, at the end, you really do, this becomes, text becomes essential.
An essential part of the book.
And maybe you could address yourself too.
the marriage of text with art, and your feelings as well.
Well, that's always been one of the most exciting things to me, and one of the hardest things about making these books is finding that link, is finding the appropriate link between words and pictures, and not being redundant, not repeating yourself, being competent enough in the visuals to know when they are communicating, when they are telling the story you want to tell, and when they really need the help of a more conventional text line.
Or when it's more efficient to say something in 15 words than it is to make a drawing of it.
And you can still make the same point.
So it's like having two different vocabularies to work with at the same time.
And the process of making these books for me is choosing from each vocabulary, weaving them together in order to most effectively communicate whatever it is you're trying to say on each page.
So you really see it then as
combining two skills of your own.
I did an interview with Anita Sylvie of your company, and Anita says today, for instance, what they like or what they look for in emerging talent is have a writer produce a story, and they'll find the artist.
They don't even want the writer to ever have met the artist.
That's very true.
And I'm wondering what your reaction to that kind of a project is.
Could you do that?
Oh, yeah.
If somebody wrote a story that I really thought was terrific, I did it once with a story by a guy named David Porter who worked with at RISD.
It's not the best way to work, and I don't think it produces the best work.
I really don't.
Walter will only work with people who do both write and illustrate.
I think it's really important.
You break these things down into their little components, and you
You can, if you're really a good editor, I suppose, or lucky, manage to create a magic sort of connection.
But the opportunity that the individual has who is encouraged to work on both paths at the same time to create something that is much more cohesive is that much greater, I think.
I don't write the book first and then illustrate it, and I don't illustrate it and then write it.
I mean, the writing and the pictures develop simultaneously.
I'll work on sketches up here, and I'll get frustrated with it, or I'll lose my way, and I'll go down to the computer, and I'll put the sketches there, and I'll start to just write some rough stuff, and I'll begin to see some kind of order from the words, perhaps, that comes right back up here.
It allows me to organize the pictures and to make little diagrams of the way I think the book is going to go.
Then I can go back downstairs and write some more, but it's very much one part of the process feeds the other.
I'm not
I wouldn't want to be limited to one or the other.
Writing for me has always been hard.
It's the hardest part of the process, no question about it.
Which is why I think I probably rely on the visuals to tell so much of the story.
But I enjoy the writing part of it more now than I used to.
I used to put it off as long as possible.
I would write in a very sort of sketchy, outlined way for the early Cathedral City Pyramid books.
And then I would always wait until the day after Christmas and I would sit down at the typewriter and for five days I would write, in five days I would write the story.
And by this point I had a layout of what I thought was going to be on each page anyway.
So I'd have a draft by about the 29th of December, something like that, 30th.
And then I could go back and forth and cut it up and stuff like that.
But now I tend to write much more freely, mixing that part of the process with the
My sense also is that you probably wouldn't be particularly pleased to have somebody else interpret what your pictures are.
No, because why explain the picture?
I mean, I don't use the picture as decorative in any way.
The picture has a job to do.
It has a job to do that is as important as the paragraph.
It has its part of the story to tell.
If you're going to take that tack of separating visual artists from writers, then you have to be really confident in the ability of those people to reach their own unique strengths, but on independent tracks.
If that can happen, then maybe something interesting goes on between the two things.
If a writer was in any way overwhelmed by the visual stuff and felt somewhat intimidated by it, what kind of a reaction would that create?
Maybe antagonism, who knows?
It's a really careful match that you have to make there.
It can be done, it has been done, but I am not really interested in doing books that way.
I wouldn't want to give up that part of the process.
That's why I'm not an architect.
I don't want to compromise in that way.
Now, the medium here is, I think, is that right?
It's this pen.
It's this pen right here.
And are you equally comfortable with color?
Yeah.
Is this your medium of preference?
Well, it depends on the book.
Black and white would not have been appropriate for the way things work.
It needed color, in part, to liven it up.
to soften it, because it's such a mass of information.
The black and white works here because it's really about details.
A lot of it is about details and shape and basic light and dark.
It's not about the color of the stucco or that sort of thing.
That's another wonderful layer of information, but that's not what I wanted to talk about.
This was really about the details that you run into as you wander through the streets of Rome.
You said when you did Cathedral, you really didn't have a sense of scale, and really you weren't thinking of the printed page at that particular point.
I assume now, as you've progressed, that you're constantly thinking of these pictures in terms of how they're going to appear in scale, whether it's going to be on the right page or on the left page, and whether you're going to have a go through the fold or whatever.
That's what I've learned.
I mean, that's been the learning process.
You know, how do you make these pages work?
When do you let a drawing bleed off the pages?
When do you use small drawings, large drawings?
When do you change points of view and that kind of stuff?
I mean, I've been sort of developing that skill all along.
But until fairly close to the end of the book, this book was, these books, these drawings all bled all the way around.
I had a friend over, an illustrator named Jan Atkins.
who came visiting one day, and he looked at the drawings, and he said, I think you should put borders around these drawings, because I think they will look larger with borders.
And I had always thought, no, if they bleed off the page, they look larger.
They look like they're still going.
Right.
Well, there's a distinction that I have decided, and it may be a completely artificial distinction, but I think the distinction is this.
With borders, with these double borders, there's a kind of formality to it, and it does give, it makes them look grander.
It's like a gallery, isn't it?
Yeah, exactly.
Like a frame.
But when they bleed off the pages, they don't necessarily look bigger, it's just that they draw you in in a different way, because in a sense they kind of surround you more with the space.
So there's subtle differences, but I like the fact that this has a formality to it now, because it plays off the line of the pigeon much more effectively.
I mean, it's as if a kid went through this fine art book with a crayon,
and said, let's just draw a line here, and let's squiggle here, and so on.
I mean, there's a kind of an intentional sort of almost sacrilege at work here, which I hope, you know, sort of emphasizes the kind of playfulness of my approach to the subject without diminishing my affection for the subject.
What have you got planned?
Well, we have two, I mean, two, I think they're kind of easy projects in a way.
One is the building's book, building book's book about process, which I think we'll try and do for the 25th anniversary of Cathedral, whether it relates specifically to Cathedral, I'm not sure yet.
And the second thing is a 10th anniversary edition of The Way Things Work, which corrections, and now there are some corrections, but more importantly, a new section on the computers.
for the end of it.
So there will be, for the end of next year.
Yeah, there are half a dozen things that are just not clear or are incorrect.
And we'll fix those.
How do you find these?
Oh, you get letters.
You get letters.
There's no shortage of experts out there who know their area.
And if you step into their area and don't get it right, they're going to tell you, which is great.
The fact that they bother to tell you
suggests a kind of respect for your efforts.
Can you give me an example?
Do you mind?
Something that you might have... I don't know.
Clarification?
I really can't remember.
They're not big things.
But you want them right.
You want it right.
They're not major misinterpretations, but maybe it's the way something turns.
It's not like putting a heart on the left side or the right side.
Maybe an arrow goes the wrong way on the gyroscope or something like that.
I don't remember.
I've actually looked at that book more critically lately, thinking to myself, even I don't know quite how to read this arrow.
What did I mean by this?
So this is a chance to
clear up some of those things.
But then, as I say, to create a new section at the end that is devoted just to digital.
Now, it's a matter of a marketplace, but where you are marketed as a children's book artist, illustrator.
But you indicated earlier, you don't see these books as exclusively defined.
But do you hear from readers of every age group?
Oh, yeah.
A lot of kids' letters, and a fair number of adults.
I'm bad at writing back, but I don't have time.
So I do know that there's a broad range out there, because they do respond.
I got a wonderful letter the other day from a fellow in Virginia about unbuilding.
this two-page description of why he loves unbuilding and how he sees the art being used, different kinds of art, within the context of the book.
I mean, it's an incredibly detailed letter that took some real... I mean, if I was trying to describe to somebody to analyze what was going on in unbuilding, which I would probably never do, I would just as soon read this letter to them because it's a really terrific analysis.
of the structure of Unbuilding and of the nature of the different drawings.
Now, you've certainly got a whole other, I mean, 25, 34 years more.
Do you see where it's going?
I don't know where it's going specifically, except that I do know I will continue to do books about the kind, continue to do books, first of all, and then continue to do books about the kinds of things that intrigue
In some cases, it's just the joy of playing with the structure of the book.
That's where a book like Shortcut or Why the Chicken Cross the Red are black and white.
But it's just playing with the object and seeing what you can do with it, having people use it in a slightly different way.
What's your reaction to, I mean, I love the fact that you use black and white, by the way, in terms of photography.
I'm so partial to black and white photography, even black and white cinema.
But, you know, we have a parallel development here with interactive stuff and computers, and we're talking now about where you see yourself 23 years from now, it'll be 2020, it'll be a year.
And, you know, do you have any anxiety about where the book is going?
I really don't.
I don't have any anxiety at all.
I think there will always be a, there may be less books produced.
Which may not be such a bad thing.
But I think that books, I mean, there are things you can do in books that you can't do in other mediums.
And there's an experience, a kind of personal experience with a book that is not the same as turning on a computer or sitting at the screen.
Does it concern you where, you know, you see this in the so-called interactive fiction?
And I'm wondering now, you know, your books are yours, and those pictures,
Would it bother you if this were published?
In pieces?
Not only in pieces, but in fragments that allow other people to go in and tamper with what you've done, have their own interpretation.
It wouldn't bother me if that was something that happened down the line.
Right.
I think that people want, and Walter and I have talked about this a lot, I mean, I think people want to hear what somebody has to say about something.
I don't think they always want just a collection of pieces that they can sort of mess around with themselves.
I mean, reading about how somebody feels about something, or the way somebody sees technology and stuff like that, I mean, that's why we read books, is to get particular points of view, particular perspectives.
Right.
I think that's always going to be true.
I like that.
I don't think that will ever go away.
I think it's always nice to be able to sort of read what somebody you admire or whose opinions you respect has to say about something.
And then if you're going to play with it later on, fine.
But I don't think people are going to want to give up that, or will give up the sort of enjoyment of finding out what somebody wants.
I'll call your publisher and I'll try to get more precise figures from them, and I certainly want to attribute these to you because you might feel a little more
But can you give me an idea of how your books do in the marketplace?
I mean, they are exceedingly popular.
Yeah, they seem to be okay.
I don't know.
What's the first printing of this, for instance?
Oh, Romantics?
I am not sure.
We talked.
It's either 30 or 50,000.
I don't know.
And the way things work is... Oh, that's done.
That's done.
Between two and three minutes.
That's done for a while.
That's amazing, isn't it?
Yeah.
Mostly in hardcover?
Was there a privilege there?
There's no paperback in the shape.
It's all hardcover.
Around the world.
That's wonderful.
Yeah.
How many languages?
A dozen.
A dozen or so.
Two or three million.
Yeah.
I think maybe two million in this country.
But, no, it's done well.
That's the franchise.
Yeah.
And you briefly, and I guess we can wrap up pretty soon,
You mentioned your family just biographically.
You mentioned you have a... Yeah, well, I remarried in January.
And in fact, the book is dedicated to Ruthie.
That's the... I mean, the little bit of love story that sort of runs through this thing, I think, reflects my own life absolutely now.
What's great is that I can put it in a place that was such a part of my life.
You know.
In 1968, 69.
Yeah, new baby.
And the baby's name is?
Julia.
She's three months old.
And your wife's name is great.
And I have two older daughters, a 16-year-old and a 23-year-old.
And they're all great with Julia.
Are you a kid at heart?
Yeah.
Connie, did you have anything you wanted to ask David?
I don't have the finished book, but I wonder if you'd write something.
We're going to Italy, as it happens quite... This is Connie, and I'm... I'm just going to briefly take a few minutes while we're going.
I forgot to bring my family together.
At some point, would you object if I called you and made an appointment to come down and shoot some pictures?
No.
But I think we're ready to get some color here, don't you think?
Do you do any photography, by the way?
I shoot all the research stuff.
They do.
Oh, yeah.
Slides.
Actually, slides and prints.
Mostly prints last night.
I've been shooting more prints than anything else.
This apparently is an historic building, and it has a date on it.
Right, right.
What's the history of the building?
It was a shop when it was first built, and it's been all kinds of things.
It was the Sons of Italy Hall up here.
There was a pool table.
There was cement on the floor when I bought the building, a layer of cement, chicken wine.
It took us a Labor Day, an entire Labor Day to get rid of it.
You mentioned that your wife designs jewelry, is that right?
Yes, she's making jewelry.
She's actually a graduate of the School of Design also.
She's now making jewelry.
Which is going well.
She just surprised herself.
She's also a maker of things.
And she studied illustration.
She studied journalism at KU and then came to RISD to study illustration.
But she's happiest when she's making things.
What is that statue over there?
Is that an Indian?
Yeah, he's sort of online from the library.
Yeah, there are a couple of these plaster castings around it.
The library had no room for it, so I said I'd give them a home.
I'm all set.
I know you have to... I'm sorry.
What's that?
About the maps.
The idea of doing a book about maps where you sort of tell a story by reading maps.
I mean, there needn't be any text actually beyond the maps themselves, and you would just turn the pages from map to map, and depending on what the map told you and how you used your imagination with the map, you would figure out where the story was from.
Of course, what is the whole essence of cartography?
It's to get you from here to there.
That's right.
Yeah, and you can do that in a very graphic way.
Oh, it's fascinating, yeah.
They're fascinating.
I mean, maps are just so intriguing because they force you to use your imagination to make that leap.
Have you ever seen that Abrams book, The Mapping of America?
You should really try and take a look at it.
Mysteries of Earth.
That's great.
You mentioned, you said that you
When you talk about exhibitions, you don't like to choke.
I don't frame this up and put it up like it's fine art.
It's really processed.
They're working drawings.